# FakeCheck
#### Video Demo:  https://youtu.be/pg8r2SHZwgI

#### Description: 
#### Nowadays, the problem of fake facts and news spreading across social media platforms and messengers (Whatsapp and Telegram, for example) has become global and very dangerous. This issue is actual for many countries and societies with high levels of Internet access, including Kazakh, American societies and a number of others all across the planet. Problem of fake news directly influences the processes occurring in countries. It can be used in order to change political sentiments of people thus influencing the course of elections, like it was in Türkiye in 2022, during presidential elections, where AI-made videos played the role of slander against opponents of the current president.
#### In order to mitigate this, people created a process of verifying the factual accuracy of questioned reporting and statements, named fact-checking. However, doing this by humans has some cons underneath the hood. For instance, personal views of fact-checkers can influence the way they choose facts to check, in some ways acquire the logic of cherry-picking and thus, interfere with objectivity. To tackle this, maybe, I thought, we can replace human fact-checkers with artificial intelligence, faster, more objective and more perfect? That is why I chose to make an app, powered with AI, where users could type the information they want to check, and that AI will do this.
####
#### My toolkit:
#### Firstly, I had to choose what AI to use. There were plenty of general artificial intelligences around - Chat GPT 3, Chat GPT 4, Copilot, Claude, Meta Llama and others. However, in my choice I settled on Google’s Gemini AI (ex-Bard), for several reasons:
#### 1. Gemini’s database is constantly updated, so it can talk to the recent topics;
#### 2. According to Google investigation, Gemini’s rapidness and accuracy on the level of Chat GPT 4’s, and in some cases even better;
#### 3. It’s API can be used in mobile apps;
#### 4. It is very easy and requires little time and efforts to integrate Gemini’s API with mobile apps;
#### Secondly, I had to decide on what platform and using what instruments I could develop a mobile app. Because of the fact that the course gave students the freedom to choose what type of final project to write, and I knew programming language Java, I decided to write an android app on Java, on platform Android Studio (official platform for developing mobile android applications).
####
#### The structure and the logic of the project:
#### To integrate Gemini AI’s API, I typed listed below implementation in the app-level gradle file: implementation("com.google.ai.client.generativeai:generativeai:0.8.0")
#### The project mainly consists of several major files and folders, including:
#### A folder located at com/example/cs50final, which contains .java classes that handle the business logic for the three screens the user will see;
#### A folder named layout, which contains .xml files that describe the appearance of those three screens.
#### First screen is opening, where you can see name of the app, quite abstract image that describes meaning of the application - a person holding phone with some information appearing on it, text view that by words describes in some details the point of app, and button, clicking by on user will moved to the next page.
#### Second, the main page contains the key business logic of the application. There, a person can type in the fact they want to check, and then click the button “Check information”. For convenience purposes, for typing information there is not only one edit text field, but several. They are: The data of the message appearing (year, month or day), the country, city, region that this message refers to, and the point of the message. Users have to fill in all fields, in order to make the button “Check information” enabled. After the user clicks this button, underneath the hood, or rather in the MainActivity.java file, the program will write to Gemini AI, by collecting from filled text fields the queue in a special function I wrote, named collectCallMessage(). After that, user have to wait some time to receive Gemini’s answer, and in order to not make user bored, there, on the screen will temporarily appear a text view “Wait a second”. Whereupon, the verdict of AI will appear - “Truth” or “False information”. If a user wants to read a more detailed and proofed answer, he can click the new button that appears under the verdict text view, called “Detailed information”. By clicking it, the user moves to the third and final page, where he can read a more detailed answer. AI usually gives big answers with many proofs, so, in order to fit the text view displaying the answer on the screen, I made it vertically scrollable. 

